# 26 February 2024 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Matt Radbourne - Bloomberg (MRR)
- Mark Davis - Google (MED)
- Shane Carr - Google (SFC)


Scribe: ECH


## Topic: Getting to Done

APP: A key date is this Wednesday (2024-02-28), which is when CLDR will vote on the MF spec. Also, 2024-03-13 is the last date to get code submitted into ICU. How is that looking?

TIM: I added a PR #686 related to discussion there. We can defer discussion on that to the PR.

APP: How is the ICU4J implementation going?

MIH: I have made progress on syntax parsing, but when it comes to the behavior from the data model is confusing and a can of worms that needs more work to specify. So I suspect that we will have inconsistent behavior across the ICU4C and ICU4J implementations.

APP: Not having the implementations track the work is a concern. It’s not a criticism, but we learn issues later.

MIH: I didn’t say that there won’t be an implementation. It’s just that it may not be consistent with ICU4C.

APP: Maybe we can have monthly checkins between CLDR v45 and v46. How is testing?

EAO: I have small changes that update things to the latest spec.

MIH: Back to the topic of implementations, 

MRR: I wanted to ask what the overall deliverable for testing should be. Because we have work to add 

APP: A task is to go through the repo and ensure that there are tests for all aspects of the spec, in some sort. EAO’s tests are based on an implementer needing coverage of their work. But we may not have coverage of other spec aspects, such as various syntax features.

ECH: With conformance projects, we have certain libraries under test. The way that we’re testing ECMA-402 APIs is through Node.js. It makes it a little bit difficult to test the JS implementation. Maybe we can have a specific library to test things. It would be outside the bounds of what the conformance project is designed for, but maybe that’s a later concern.

APP: Testing is a concern. I think there is a space for us to declare what things are in our CLDR v45 deliverable, and what things are outside. Including in the post-v45 timeframe.


Key Deliverables?
- Syntax
- Specification
- Implementations
   - ICU4J
   - ICU4C
   - JS
- Tests
- Data Model
- Registry Data Model

Release is 10 April.

Key dates:
- 28 February: CLDR-TC approval (milestone 45-alpha)
- 13 March: last ICU check-in
- 27 March: last specification change (milestone 45-beta)
- 10 April: CLDR release (milestone ldml-45)

We should discuss post-45 milestones.

| 2024 Feb 21, Wed |   | CLDR v45 public Alpha -- pushed to feb28        | ICU                      |
|------------------|---|-------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|
| 2024 Feb 26, Mon |   | v45 release branch created (v.46 starts)        |                          |
| 2024 Feb 29, Thu |   |                                                 | 75 feature freeze        |
| 2024 Mar 13, Wed |   | v45 Beta (data) • ready for ICU RC              | 75 last regular check-in |
| 2024 Mar 20, Wed |   |                                                 | 75 release candidate     |
| 2024 Mar 27, Wed |   | v45 public Beta (data&spec) • spec content done |                          |
| 2024 Mar 27, Wed |   | v46 Begin collecting new Org=CLDR languages     |                          |



## Topic: PR Review
Timeboxed review of items ready for merge.

| PR   | Description                                                                        | Recommendation |
|------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| #687 | Require ISO8601 date or datetime literals                                          | Discuss        |
| #686 | Add note to “Function Resolution” section about function argument and result types | Discuss        |
| #682 | Require null characters to be escaped as \0                                        | Discuss        |
| #681 | Add note about XML C0 characters adding restrictions                               | Merge          |
| #673 | Fix whitespace conformance to match UAX31                                          | Discuss        |
| #651 | Review data model                                                                  | Close          |
| #646 | Update spec as if PR #645 were accepted                                            | LDML46         |
| #645 | Add design doc for dataflow composability (#515)                                   | LDML46.        |
| #634 | Design doc to capture registry maintenance                                         | LDML46         |
| #584 | Add new terms to glossary                                                          | Future         |
| #558 | Add <when> to help select the right <match>                                        | Future         |



### #651

APP: I think we can close this. MIH, I would rather have you work on coding the ICU4J implementation.

MIH: Sounds good.

APP: Okay, I will close this PR unless anyone objects.

### #673

APP: This is based on a comment from someone about whitespace conformance. This is about Unicode’s UAX 31’s Bidi and source code spoofing specs. I worked with Robin Leroy to get the Bidi controls in the right places and get our spec updated accordingly. It requires specifying which whitespace is optional vs. required. Because these are Unicode standards, and MFWG is Unicode, we should pay attention. THere is a question of whether we should take up these changes later. I have a desire to make our current syntax as forward-looking as we can. Introducing more characters in the whitespace production (rule) later would make me nervous.

EAO: I think we should take this up later. I don’t think this is a problem to do so, my strong preference.

MED: I’m deeply conflicted. I think the changes to the syntax to have required and optional whitespace are nice, irrespective of Bidi. It’s a cleaner model for syntax. Getting them in would allow us to get feedback. 

APP: I carefully did this so that the parent controls are on the outside of things, so that the Bidi controls appear on the whitespace itself, and not inter-mixed. It’s still somewhat loose, so we can do some syntax things later to tighten that up. It allows users to make messages that are visually correct and that don’t interfere with processing. That is my goal. If don’t take this, then we need text to forewarn that this will be added later.

EAO: Adding Bidi markers into the whitespace rule then makes whitespace significant. For example, if you translate into a language that needs Bidi controls, then those will come into the whitespace of the translated message. There is too much there to discuss to make it into the syntax this week. We need more time and implementation and practical experience. What do editors do with an FSI-PDI pair?

APP: That is a fair observation. Again, I spent some time on this. Controls are always optional, and can always be dropped on the floor by a serializer. We are looking to do something that requires people to take on faith that we got it correct, which I feel hesitant about. We can create a branch in our repo to accumulate post-v45 changes so that we can work on this in parallel with v45 release work.

MIH: It would be nice to have it in v45 to get feedback, but I don’t see the urgent need for practical purposes. I played with Bidi characters in VS Code, IntelliJ, and Eclipse, you get junk. It can help for code review tools that are in-browser, but practically, it doesn’t help much. We can fight over it after getting it in.

MED: I’m conflicted. We should get it in before the final release. We could have dot releases during the Tech Preview. Also, I should mention that APP has done some really good work here because Bidi is difficult to get right.

APP: I will create a separate branch for post-v45 work to begin. Then I will make a PR for a separate note to say that there will be post-v45 work done.

STA: Maybe we can use `main` as our development branch, and we can have a release branch to represent a specific version.

EAO: We can get some incremental dot releases in Mihai’s ICU4J implementation and also the JS implementation that I’m working on. We can also start working on a Language Server Protocol (LSP) implementation that editors can use.

MED: We can probably hold off on a lot of that until later on.

APP: Who objects to creating a branch for post-release work, and adding a note in the spec? No objections heard.

### #682

APP: Bruno Heiboldt noticed that our syntax allows for a lot of “C0” control characters that cannot be transmitted. EAO has a change to give an escape sequence for the C0 (‘NUL’, code point 0) character. That might have implications for the data model.

EAO: My reading of the PR is that it removes support for removing the NUL character, but not much for adding support for enabling it through an escape sequence. I’m okay with that.

MIH: XLIFF already has a way to escape this stuff. The other thing is, do we have a use case to have C0 / NUL characters in translatable strings?

I’m just trying to say that we’re already opinionated in certain ways.

MED: I’d like to call the question, we’re spending gobs of time on issues that are peripheral: does anyone strongly want to have NULs in messages?

EAO: I’d like to point out that you can still have NULs in a message through a variable or a function that returns it.

APP: So we should close this PR since we won’t have C0 / NULs. And we can update the spec to disallow NULs.

EAO: Let me update the PR to do the latter action.

APP: Any objection to that? I hear no object. Can we agree to fast track that change? I hear yes.

### #681

APP: We should still say something about C0 controls that XML doesn’t represent. We need to put something in the data model for now, and come back to it later in the XML data model.

EAO: We can also see whether anyone needs it in the XML data model, or if they need to use the JSON representation.

STA: My concern is that it is not very actionable. It says that if you need to do so, you can implement a restriction in your implementation. But doing so in just one implementation is not a solution. There needs to be a note that we intend to take action.

MED: I think that at this point, we’re better off making notes about things that we will fix in the future.

MIH: Furthermore, defining a C0 escape mechanism ignores that other

EAO: Should the note say that a mechanism to escape C0 will be done later?

MED: We shouldn’t even commit to that.

EAO: I will update and send it for review.

### #687

EAO: As I mentioned in the comment, we aren’t defining the host/system type of a number. Ex: JS for a number literal. I would like the JS implementation take the datetime literal and parse it into a DateTIme. Or to use it in the constructor for a DateTime. But these two parsers behave differently. Is there a subset of inputs that are guaranteed to work everywhere? The PR is attempting to assert that.

APP: What I attempted to do for the `datetime` is use existing standards. There is the “3339” spec that will come in and specify things. In the future, there could be new standards that increase the set of literals accepted. I’m nervous about people attempting to use literals that are not supported in 

MED: I see literals to be very tightly bound to the functions that use them. So if we have `:dateitme`, we can have literals passed into that to produce a variable. If you wanted to select on DateTimes, for whatever reason, they will be there. I can’t see that ICU will support this without a real time zone or an offset. I see the benefit of having literals that don’t have time zones specified, though.

APP: I see the problem with time zones and offsets. Some formats do indeed support them. I can support doing what EAO has done. After thinking about it, my main concern is having `:date` and `:datetime` (we can live without `:time`), and I propose that we do this now. We will come back when ___ (“CDATE”?) is done.

EAO: This is not just for `:date` and `:time`, this ia slo for `:datetime`. This regex says that if you match, you should definitely be fine (have a valid string). We could have another regex that defines that a string is definitely not valid. And string in between are unclear.

APP: Let’s worry about that later. Let’s merge this and do work on `:date` and `:time` later.

### #686

TIM: This is an attempt to make the spec clearer on the same issue that #645 was about, but with a smaller scope. This is about “can functions compose?”. This isn’t making a strawman argument. This is related to the example in issue #515. 

```
.local $a = {1 :number minIntegerDigits=3} // formats as 001.
.local $b = {$a :number minFractionDigits=3} // formats as 001.000
```

This is about what the spec says the return value of the resolution of the argument in `.local`. This came up during review in the ICU-TC for the type used to represent the return value of the resolved value.

APP: I made comments about the text. The question is whether the formatting is applied to the operand. I think it’s important not to think of this as the “return value” because it isn’t at all the return value. It may also be that functions need to define whether they affect the revolved value or have transitive options.

STA: This is a very important feature that the spec mandates. It allows that inflected languages be supported. It’s important to make the spec stricter.

MED: I’m not sure what it is that is being mandated. What do you mean?

STA: The crucial behavior is that the `.local $b` is able to inspect the formatted value returned and the options passed to the formatter.

MED: I think that isn’t the interesting example. I’ll give one

```
.local $a = {1.23 :number minFractionDigits=2} // formats as 1.2
.local $b = {$a :number minFractionDigits=3} // formats as 1.23 (1.20)
```



The options are just formatting options. We inherit the options of the previous declaration, and we can override them. I would object strongly to forcing an implementation to say that the `.local $b` in the second example would ultimately be formatted as 1.20.

```
.local $a = {1.23 :number style=percent signDisplay=alway numberSystem=arab} // formats as ١٢٣%
.local $b = {$a :number style=decimal numberSystem=latn} // formats as +1.23 (NOT 123, not ١.٢٣ )
```

These are formatting options. They are not change-the-value options. In other words, I could change this to the following, and have exactly the same effect.

```
.local $a = {1.23 :number style=percent minFraction=2 signDisplay=always} // formats as +١٢٣%
.local $b = {1.23 :number style=decimal numberSystem=latn minFraction=2 signDisplay=always} // formats as +1.23 (NOT 123)
```

At every step

ECH: A summary of options for resolving the ambiguities 

* Option A1: .local represents function option overrides when functions are same, but standard functions need to stabilized if you want function composition guarantees when functions differ
* Option A2: .local represents function option overrides when functions are same, but disallow composition of .local when functions differ for tech preview
* Option B: .local represents function invocation results (which allows composition) regardless of functions being the same/different, and create syntax .override to represent function option overrides when functions are the same
* Option C: Altogether disallow the argument to a .local being a previous .local or .input declaration name. This allows us to defer a decision on what .local actually means until later, and it simplifies our short-term implementation work as a result. The tradeoff is that, until such time, function options must be fully expressed (no concision of overrides), and no support for function composition.

APP: What I focused on in the text of the PR, I focused on functions should expose and resolve their operand. When we talk about resolved value, we’re not altering the value, we’re just passing the original value in a structured way. I can easily think of examples in which you don’t want the function to modify the value. 

MED: If you are switching (using different) functions in the passing of one .local into another, then you can’t inherit 

APP: Yes. And in other cases, you do want to modify the result, such as if you want to uppercase the formatted result.

(my proposed text:
> Thus, implementations SHOULD provide a means for _functions_ to  expose
the resolved value and resolved option values of their _operand_
and _functions_ SHOULD populate that mechanism
with a data structure or type consistent with the set of implementation-defined
types that they would support as input.

STA: The functionality outlined in the examples above is very much in line with what I had in mind. I implemented this type of chaining / composition of functions in an old prototype from a year ago. The mental model I have is that we cannot forbid any type of value passed to any type of function. This will happen anyways. We’re not a typed language. We can force anyone to Option A or B or C. The only options we have is: 1) that all formatters return strings, or 2) we say that chained formatter have access to previous formatted values and provided formatter options.

SFC: I just wanted to express support for Option A2 because it is messy any time we get into compose function results into other different types of functions. I think A2 is a good middle ground. It is easier to implement and is less surprising. One risk with A2 is if the arguments to the function are not options bags, how does the option merging work? I think Option C is also good because it allows us to defer the problem for later. There is a potential for some problems with resolving types. Actually Option C is safer, but Option A2 is probably harmless.

TIM: I wanted to point out that with Option A2, it ____, given that you’re pointing out that we’re in a typeless environment.  Regarding the fType, the functions are doing transformations. Option B makes that clearer, but that then requires a lot of work. Having a discussion about the options is good, but my question as is in the PR is whether this is the role of the spec to give guidance about what the implementation should do. The spec has been deliberately agnostic to what the implementation should do. That is the first thing to answer before choosing an option, if applicable.

EAO: We should be able to allow people to pass function results to different function types, like a `:number` to a `:date`, or what have you.

MIH: I tried to think about the use case of this, in the end. If all we are doing is reformatting an input value with different options, then all we’re doing is saving typing by allowing option overriding, which is not that interesting. But allowing one formatter result to be passed to another allows chaining / composition, which is powerful, and that is useful.

APP: We won’t have time to address all of these discussions and solve them by Wednesday. My changes to Tim’s PR is to make it easy for implementations in statically typed languages and dynamically typed languages in the way that makes sense for them.

MED: I actually disagree. I think we have to be careful, here. We’ve gotten a lot of feature creep. We have all these options on variables, and we want to save typing them by hoisting them up into a `.local`. It prevents people from making newbie errors, because if you change the format of a number, it will select differently. We’ve seen instances in MF1 where people format a number that changes the number from the TWO plural category to the ONE category. It’s hard to talk about arbitrary transformations. Translators will not have access to the transforms. They will just have access to the literals. Making sure that something agrees with something else through options. We’re not designing a programming language. We can’t do loops. Talk about transforms makes me very nervous. And I’m not sure you can come up with something interesting if we say “what is the Date of a PersonName?”. To get back to your point, I think we want to make the minimum workable, and I suspect that implementations will diverge since we’re not specifying how we handle what happens when we pass once `.local` into another. But we do need to handle that.

STA: Thanks TIM and EAO, you expressed better what I was saying. SFC’s comment about the merging of options makes me think that function composition is important. So if we only specify options merging, we should not castrate the spec in a way that prevents that from being specified in the future.

ECH: SFC and MED’s comments cover what I want to say, but I will reiterate. Options A2 and C are safe by disallowing function composition which is error prone and at least needs more work to be fully clear, and they buy us time to do so while specifying option overriding, which we know is fairly safe. And that is in line with what STA wants, as it does not castrate the spec.

RGN: example in the current documentation: https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/61273c7c525d93c678a848a4413b64518d593071/spec/errors.md#formatting-errors

```
.local $id = {$user :get field=id}
{{Hello, {$id :get field=name}!}}
```
(error because `:get` "*requires its argument to be an object* and an option field to be provided with a string value")

MIH: We also have implementation for message references:
`Click {btnCancel :msgRef} to continue`
So :msgRef takes a messageID (string) and returns a message.
loaded from the resources (whatever that is)

APP: to be fair. we've have chained transformers on our mind throughout

APP: I don’t think Option C supports the overriding of options that we have down. We do have the default registry, and we should specify what default registry functions do with their operands and resolved options. We should specify things so that people don’t write their functions in an incompatible way. So maybe we need to write a big note to say that this will be specified later in the post CLDR v45 period.

STA: If we’re talking about the default registry, then it doesn’t preclude the 

MED: I think Option A2 is safe because it only specifies option overriding where we know it makes sense. And it doesn’t specify it where it doesn’t yet make sense without further work. So Option A2 buys us extra time with that.

APP: TIM, can you update your PR to include the note in the spec. I will merge that at the end of tomorrow, and that will be the last thing that we merge into MFWG before the CLDR v45 alpha milestone.


## Topic: Issue review
Let’s close all of the issues
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3ALDML45


| Issue | Description                                                             | Recommendation |
|-------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|
| #689  | [FEEDBACK] the `2-digit` datetime field option values need to be quoted | Discuss        |
| #683  | Update status of registry spec for TP                                   | See PR #684    |
| #680  | Restrict literals for :date and :time                                   | Discuss        |
| #678  | Define `resolved value` formally`                                       | Discuss        |
| #665  | Bring back option `timeZone`                                            | Discuss        |
| #664  | Remove :number (etc) support for notation and compactDisplay            | Discuss        |
| #661  | [FEEDBACK] Improve bidi layout                                          | See PR #673    |
| #635  | Some red flags with the current grammar for reserved-statement          | Discuss        |



### #665

APP: We pushed the bag of options of date/time/datetime into post-45 RGI work. Does anyone support pushing that back up?

EAO: I don’t think we have time for that. SFC has asked for us to look into compound values. We should respect the decision that we made in 1-2 weeks ago about that.

### #664

APP: Compact display turns out to be a special case of one type of notations. I propose to keep this for post v45 work.

MED: I don’t think we need to remove them from the Tech Preview.

APP: Okay, no other opinions. So we won’t do it.

### #635

APP: Sorry MIH, we didn’t get to this even though I promised to do so.

MIH: It’s too late at this point. We need to put it for v45 consideration now.

APP: All other new feature work will be now be deferred to post v45 releases. Any objections to what we are going to submit for consideration to CLDR v45, with the caveats we have noted.


## Topic: AOB?

APP: I didn’t say this in my Unicode MessageFormat Virtual Open House, but I looked at my notes for the Unicode Conference 39, which was 9 years ago. So here we are (releasing this spec into the wild), and we’re not done yet.

MED: I want to express my thanks to Addison for all of the work he’s done to shepherd this along. That is not easy work.

APP: And thanks to most of the people on this call, who have been consistent contributors throughout the entire timeline as well.
