# 29 January 2024 | MessageFormat Working Group Regular Teleconference


### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Matt Radbourne - Bloomberg (MRR)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)

Scribe: TIM, MRR

## Topic: Action Item Review
 - [x] MRR, please coordinate with ECH and EAO.
 - [ ] MIH and STA, please work on documenting the use-cases for options on markup close
 - [ ] APP, developer `:number` doc
 - [ ] All, review http://tc39.es/proposal-intl-messageformat/
 - [ ] APP, develop list of things that need beta feedback

APP: there was an action item to coordinate re: testing – how’s that coming?

(Technical difficulties)

APP: status of documenting use-cases for markup close options?

STA: Forgot to schedule meeting with MIH – can we wait two more days? Can resolve async

APP: Should we not discuss options on markup close this week, wait for next week?

STA: I know we wanted to do it this week and not have it hanging, but it’s a small change that I wouldn’t mind – not risky to leave for a few more days.

EAO: I’ll be happy to continue talking about this when we’ve had the examples in the issue at least for a little while

ECH: Back to the testing – I met with MRR last week. He showed me the code he worked on, based on the conformance project. I showed him more about the conformance project. 
We’re thinking that given the similarities in how he set up his code and the extra things the conformance project can provide, would make the most sense to take what he’s got 
and adapt it to something that can just be a PR on the conformance project.

APP: I’ll mark that action as done; can give updates as we go.

ECH: Matt, just ping me when you want to meet again

EAO: Noting that we have a design document on testing. I would suggest that if you’re not familiar with it, look at it and see if the work you’re doing now should be 
incorporated into it so we can eventually accept the design document.

MRR: Yes, the first question to ask would be if anything in the design doc should change based on the decisions made for conformance

## Info Share

APP: I had someone reach out to me on LinkedIn who works on golang, who’s been tracking our work. I’ve been trading messages with him to see if we can get a look at their implementation.

## Topic: Progressing to Done

The main blockers appear to be the following:
- ~~Beautification of the syntax discussion~~
- ~~What’s in a name? (Does NCName fix our woes? Go to UAX31? what?)~~
- ~~Quoting~~
- ~~Format-to-Parts~~
- ~~Spannables~~
- ~~Expression Attributes~~
- Registry and default functions
- Implementation and testing


Schedule:
1. No new LDML45 issues after 15 January.
2. All LDML45 issues resolved by end of F2F. Balloting alpha spec to occur 15 February.
3. Beta spec and registry by 11 March.
4. Can make limited changes thereafter, for issues discovered by implementers.
5. Release 10 April as part of LDML45

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/603

## Topic: Active PR review

PR 560

APP: We have consensus on what to do, but not on what the registry format should be. Merging is premature

MIH: Stas proposed last week to drop all the aliases.

APP: What we’re doing right now is saying “here are the names of functions and their options”. How they are described in the registry is a post-45 thing. Whether integer is an alias or just its own function doesn’t matter until we decide how to represent it in the registry.

MIH: I was arguing that we shouldn’t put them in the registry at all.

APP: The discussion we’re having is: here is the proposed list of functions and their options. That’s the debate; anything else is out of bounds. We have some decisions we’ve made about that and when we get to that discussion, let’s do that. 560 doesn’t matter b/c it’s about a registry format we’re still working on. There was a call this past week that I couldn’t attend, Eemeli and Stas had a discussion about the format of the registry; I think that’s maybe interesting for us to discuss

EAO: My preference is to merge because that would bring AFAIK into alignment the last thing we have such that we have an accepted design doc, but the spec text is different. I agree that we need to figure out how to represent the registry functions that we do need to choose, and we do have this ongoing discussion about whether to trim down the list of functions to include further, but we’re in a weird place where we have an accepted design for number/plural/ordinal and we have this accepted PR but it’s not merged. So I would find it easier to merge this and then have the discussion about whether to e.g. remove plural and ordinal from it. 

STA: So separate from the discussion of how this should be expressed in the registry, I think there’s an interesting conversation to be had about the scope of the first iteration of the registry. My instinct is to drop functions from the registry that overlap in functionality with other functions. If there’s already a datetime function, drop date and time. If there’s a number function, drop plural. At least then we end up with one way to do things; see what the feedback is, add missing pieces. That’s what I would like to see

APP: Personal response: I think e.g. with date and time, I’ve given some examples for why having separate functions is helpful to message authors vs. just having datetime and forcing people to always use a bunch of option bags to get just a date or just a time. I can see having an integer function and having some of these other functions… whether you want to call it an alias or just a different function doesn’t matter to me, but I’m super concerned that we not have a poor set of functions and then have people go invent stuff to make it more convenient to use, when we should have provided it. To Eemeli, this is on the registry.xml file and we could merge it and it really wouldn’t matter b/c we’ll do stuff to that file later. Would that be an appropriate outcome? We’re going to have the conversation about what functions to put in. Doesn’t influence whether we have specific aliases. Can we clear this off our plate?

APP: I’ll add a comment: without prejudice in favor of any specific functions, merging. Sound good? Any objection?

MIH: There’s no position; it doesn’t mean agreement?

APP: It doesn’t mean anything, just means we don’t have to look at it anymore. Not a precedent.

### #570

APP: About adding the date and time functions. Wait for discussion to be complete? Any objection? [none]

### #582
APP: Decided  to defer 

### #616

APP: Add doc… Eemeli, I’ll let you introduce it

EAO: We’re not tracking which of our design docs are accepted and which are proposals. Leading us to doing things out of order, specifically when looking at this, I think a solution is to put accepted design docs in a different place. For example, MessageFormat 1 vs. 2… I noticed we have a proposal w/ the status of “Balloting” that was updated to “accepted”. I don’t remember which one. That so-called “accepted” doc doesn’t list any accepted design on it. My preference here would be to have an explicit place where stuff that is properly accepted and ready can land, so it becomes clearer to us to track what we’re still working on and how to get it to resolve.

APP: Mark sent around that thing asking people to make comments, I don’t know if anyone actually read it or did anything with it. I pointed to the design docs. (the directory we currently have them in.) So maybe don’t move them just at the moment. Longer term, design documents are relevant to us in our discussions because they try to keep track of what we agreed and provide a place to write out technical design choices. I’m not pedantic about what those things say at the moment. But you’re right, we haven’t cleaned them up, and that would be helpful. Do you all want to organize things better?

STA: Thanks Eemeli for starting this. I think we could maybe do this later once we have a complete set of design docs. Probably low priority right now. I personally wouldn’t bother with moving things around as part of the process if the problem here is that we have a bit of an outdated status here and there. Maybe we should take stock of all the docs and their statuses and fix them in one PR. My vote is to keep things as they are.

MIH: What about if we change the content – the content is nothing controversial here? In a lot of the places, the name of the document is “design proposal template” and Eemeli correctly updated the title. I would make them two commits, sometimes Git clients are confused if you move and change something at the same time. Separate commit for moving.

APP: In the short term, I think maybe we make sure that they’re clean and keep them in one place and we can do some organizational work later. I don’t think it’s confusing us. When I need one of these, I go find it. Some overlap with each other and that’s unfortunate.

EAO: OK, I feel like I’ve done my bit about trying to get this better sorted. I am no longer in charge of this PR, if someone wants to take parts of it and then adapt, like changing links and titles. I’m not touching it anymore.

### #618

APP: MF1 compatibility matrix – EAO went in and added items to the bottom of the design doc that I put together with some of the things that were missing. Doesn’t change the top, the list of functions and options. Just making the bottom table more complete. What do people think? We still need to discuss what actually goes in the registry.

EAO: The main reason for starting this is that I noticed that the table was including :currency and :percent, which the text above noted we are not doing. I ended up fixing some of the other things in there. The only open discussion there is whether we claim that a :number select exact corresponds somewhat to a MessageFormat 1 select or not. Otherwise I don’t believe it contains anything controversial. Just makes doc internally consistent.

APP: Yes. My comment about that was that you made a guess as to what the behavior of what select exact would be. My first reaction is maybe that’s not right, and calls for a separate issue or part of our discussion of number. So would we – I’ll create a separate issue. Merge this in and then discuss functions and their options? Or do people want more time to look? Merge?

MIH: I looked at it, I’m fine with merging.

APP: Any objection? [none] 

## Topic: Open Issue Review
- https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues
- Currently we have 29 open (was 36 last time).
- 3 are resolved-candidate and proposed for close.
- 6 are Agenda+ and proposed for discussion.
- 12 are Future (nor for this release)
- 14 are LDML45
- 2 require release triage (#598, #561)

### #603

APP: Should we require * if variant keys exhaust all possibilities?

STA: Eemeli filed this b/c I mentioned it on the 15th. I think the convenience granted by the registry, assuming it’s common enough in the future, will likely be enough to ensure exhaustiveness checks. Which means that probably, we don’t have to be super safe about enforcing variants in the syntax itself. So this is a bit of a bet that the future will be better than the present. I think what we could gain is nice expressive messages where there are only 2-3 variants that self-document. Not having to rename one of them as a * variant. So to me it’s a question of being able to use the syntax to self-document, rather than using it defensively to guard against runtime failure. Runtime failure could also be handled through [didn’t hear]

MIH: My gut feeling is to oppose. We discussed this a long time ago. I think the registry is not going to be supported and widespread for a long time, propagating to all the tools. I’m talking 10 years, just based on how other things were adopted. The other thing is, even if it’s there and fully supported, options change. I gave an example on the PR: French plurals that changed after many years and were kind of disruptive for a lot of places. I still think it’s a very good thing to have a default and I’m reluctant to make this change at this point, which is very late.

APP: We had this in a design doc before. I understand the argument that when you have a complete set, it feels weird to require the * because then you have “true”, “false”, “*” and the * is unreachable. To Eemeli’s point, remember this is ranking. False matches better than * but * still matches. When you have multiple select, then if one of them doesn’t have *, it’s harder to see if there’s a problem. True, *, false, false – is that complete? How do I know that there’s an ultimate fallback in here, that the set is closed and will produce a valid result? Requiring * means that there will always be a message we can detect at parse time w/o access to the registry, to know that the message is complete. That has its inconveniences but has a certain convenience as well.

STA: I wanted to respond to the argument about variants changing over time. I think that, again, is to me a prime example of how the registry can help. The right fix is to migrate translations offline, or on build time, and to detect that variants are missing. This is where the registry can be used. Next-best fix is to handle it in a custom implementation of the selector function. Relying on * when – If the message was written with the intent that * means actually a very specific case, like “female”/”feminine”/”other”, and then we overload it because variants change – that’s not a good experience anyways, b/c that’s not what this variant was about. I don’t think that’s a good experience, it’s debatable, better than just breaking the string completely. Yes, it’s difficult to migrate in such cases, but the registry is the way to do it and we’re giving these tools to people.

EAO: One place where a decision is likely going to influence the base registry is in our definition of how plural selection happens. Right now, the general way in which selection seems to be handled – for example, in ICU MessageFormat 1, if you have a case that is called “other”, not *, called “other”, then this acts as a catchall for plural selection. So it means that if you have e.g. a plural selection happening but you only have a case of “other”, the “other” case will be selected even if the input value is the number 1 that would match the “one” case. So if we do keep our current behavior of not considering plural selection or anywhere else, the string “other” anything special, but provide the same functionality via the “*”, it would mean that a MessageFormat 2 selection on a number – a plural selection where the available variants are other and *, and the input was 1, would end up selecting the *. It would never match the “other”. It wouldn’t make sense unless we make this adjustment, allowing the selector to provide its own fallback. I would find it very strange if we chose not to do this and also documented that numerical selection should do fallbacking to the “other” case, even if the input value doesn’t match that category.

MIH: I’m not sure I understood – I don’t think we’ll have “other” showing in our case. We’ll have the * instead. Back to Stas, I did add my arguments on the proposal. I agree w/ you that yes, we can fix things at runtime or build time. I imagine this is going to be a standard in browsers, Android, Windows, etc. Windows will push an update, the implementation will change from under you, your application that worked for 10 years will explode. Maybe it’ll be forever broken; no one is around to fix it. Even if people are around, it means 5000 applications will be broken for a while until they slowly update themselves…

STA: if you really care about this scenario, you could still use *

MIH: if we don’t force developers to use the “*”, they won’t do it. No one expects French to change the number of plurals; languages don’t change that often. 

APP: My observation is: I don’t think a bunch of these arguments make sense completely. Let me start with Eemeli’s. I think you can have both “other” and * . Remember, we rank those things. An implementation might rank them equivalently, or rank one higher if the keyword produced by a plural-rules function is “other”, or it could match * . Remember, there are cases when “other” is the product of the plural-rules code and is a target, not just a fallback. That’s a weirdness of plural-rules. Stas, you brought up things like gender, where I agree with you that you don’t want * to be, let’s say, feminine, because there are languages where – German has three. Which one is the default? The default doesn’t make sense. So you want to have a closed set, and have it behave responsibly. Then you have a hard time writing the * message because not every language has a gender-neutral way of writing it. That’s really what the * wants to be, “I don’t have any data so try to say something.” Mihai, your example of French is – good from the POV that what you don’t want to have happen is that a message in the field breaks when you deploy new code; that it would go into an unaddressed state. But in most of these cases, there was an “other” already there, and that catchall caught the result. Gender would be different b/c if you introduced a new gender, there’s no default unless we give *. There’s two ways we could spell this: nobody’s French messages failed, the keyword just didn’t match properly and we needed to get more translations to make it work, but the messages all still worked.

MIH: They worked because there was an “other” there, and it was there because it was mandatory in MF1.

EAO: 

[Tim missed some stuff]

MIH: Plural is a real example… good practice to have a default for anything. Number is just an accident. 

APP: We’re saying for all of the enumerated, you also have to provide a *. Plural has an ‘other’. We haven’t relied on the registry very much - we could start to rely on it and say “a message can be syntactically correct and not provide an output”. What we need to decide is if we’re going to go backwards on that now/later.

EAO: APP and others have described the selector in ways that don’t match the algorithm. In the algo, a selection like number will never be given the star, only the explicit key values. The * will be taken into account by the surrounding algo.

MIH: I’[m not sure about how number works. In my mind there would be no ‘other’ - it would be mapped automatically to *... but it doesn’t have to be decided now. In Android, we have discussions about gender - they introduce masc, fem and neutral. They want * to mean ‘I don’t know’ (something other than neutral).

APP: EAO - if you watch my UTW video the * has to be partially visible because the variant needs to be around to be ranked (where you have multiple selectors). It’s not just a catch-all - like number, it’s an output value. My mental model is that it’s visible in the result set - maybe not one of the keys but it has to be rankable.

STA: Suggest a resolution - I second EAO. The number selector is more interesting. I’d advocate for Polish as an example. We don’t want to overload ‘other’. I’d suggest we leave this out of scope for now and start with a more restrictive “starts are required” then, if we hear feedback, it’s a clear migration path. We need to document in the registry what the * is supposed to mean.

EAO: In plural selection the ‘other’ or sometimes the ‘many’ cases don’t mean what the reader thinks it means. This can lead to the error case MIH was talking about.

APP: In Polish, the rule that fires in most cases is ‘many’.

STA: It wasn’t previously possible to use plurals.

APP: We’re confusing things - * isn’t that. It’s strange that * is a default and a value in plural rules.
There’s a couple of things here: number isn’t the perfect test case - it’s like many of the other kinds of selectors with open-set or closed-set enumerations. (also e.g. any date-matching functions currently). Do we want to make a change here now - take away the requirement of * in the spec, or better to say you have to have a * and relax later?

EAO: Keep it now, relax later.

APP: Should we put a warning note and ask for feedback on this?

EAO: Yes.

APP: Take that as an action and not do it in 45. [All agree]


### #407

APP: How do people validate inputs using the registry since we’re typeless? We have some things about numbers in our syntax but we don’t have a good description of e.g. a temporal object, or one with a currency in it?

EAO: We need to work on describing the behavior of our default functions. The registry XML is just describing crudely their interfaces. We should describe them for human readers. Re. regular expressions, they’re good for describing well-formed ness but we can’t use them for validation.

MIH: Regular expressions are not intended to validate real things (e.g. a real date). I don’t think regular expressions are good enough anyway - we should be able to have URLs pointing to specs for real things. It’s not realistic to explain every parameter in the number formatter. We should be able to point to standard documentation.

APP: We probably need a statement about typing and matching implied/explicit types. That will be different in Java/C/JS. Maybe there are specific string inputs that are inferred as these objects.

MIH: In the current ICU4J tech preview, that is something that you can specify in the registry (e.g. use this formatting function). Absolutely yes. The string part is risky - it’s asking for trouble.

EAO: Just noting, for Intl.messageformat: It does have exact descriptions on how the :string and :number functions work for formatting and selection. I’d appreciate it if somebody else could look at those descriptions and I could probably do the work of matching the language from that spec to this spec. I’d appreciate somebody taking a look so I don’t do the work in vain.

APP: How do implementations know, given some object, what function to invoke by default for it. Obviously you can name a function with an annotation. If that doesn’t match, you’ll get some kind of error from the formatter - you’re in the realm of the fallback representation.
JavaScripts problems are different than Java or C’s problems but they’re in the same camp.

EAO: All of these languages and libraries provide something similar to JS Intl.plural rules where you init with options and give it a numeric value and get out one of the CLDR identifiers. It’s something that we do need to specify in the spec. [It’s related to] how we treat the ‘other’ case [discussed above].

APP: Yes - we require you to have a plural selector - we need to describe that. I agree. I took the action to write that. Going back to 408:

## 408

APP: Are we saying this is something that stays implementation-defined?

EAO: I think we already have language in that allows for {var} to be inferred as going to a formatter. I don’t think we should go beyond that. What the registry is providing for now is “if you break this regex rule, you’re _definitely_ broken”. They’re not saying what’s good, they’re saying what’s _definitely_ bad.

STA: I noticed that the registry is not the right place to encode that information - I’d expect it to be used in authoring scenarios. The runtime type is useful at the callsite. It’s something we’ll want to expose.

APP: MIH has a Java implementation. He’s going to want to describe Java classes and implementations. … everything in his space will be Java. His registry format has no relevance to the JavaScript implementation. Maybe it’s something that we describe general and specific implementations explain how you manage typing.

MIH: current code for the ICU4J tech preview:

```java
.setFormatter("number", new NumberFormatterFactory())
.setDefaultFormatterNameForType(Integer.class, "number")
.setDefaultFormatterNameForType(Double.class, "number")
.setDefaultFormatterNameForType(Number.class, "number")
.setDefaultFormatterNameForType(CurrencyAmount.class, "number")
```
 
STA: If you ‘input’ declare external variables, you’re giving them types. Maybe we already have a very simple type system by having custom functions. Would it be useful for the registry for the value of a particular option (e.g. “I want to take them as the value of column number”). That could be enough.

APP: Sounds like we’re in agreement. How do we want to handle this? The issue is too general. I think we need something in the spec”map your types the way you need to - we’ll describe what the built-in functions can accept, but you describe what the concrete types are.

MIH: I think both - it should be about validating the literal expression. [{|2023-12-21| :date}]. It’s convenient to have ‘regex or something else’. I don’t know how easy it is to validate ISO8601 with regex.

STA: Regex are good for describing the tiny DSLs that we expect custom functions to parse. The type abstractions are good for variable references.

EAO: We clearly communicate that the Regex - matching them is a minimum requirement for well-formed-ness but does not guarantee validity. Matching does not need to be exhaustive to say “the thing you entered is never going to be good for this”.

APP: To MIH’s point - it’s possible to have literals and feed to functions. We need to be able to describe how these are formatted (e.g. it’s allowed to be parsed to a date). It’s separate from the whole duck-typing thing.

MIH: I’d be reluctant to say we guarantee something will be parsed right - there are things that we can’t describe with regex. I find it difficult to give any guarantees.

APP: It doesn’t solve the typing problem.

MIH: It’s a separate thing about providing guarantees. It helps you not to put total crap, but it might be wrong.

APP: This conversation is looping because we’;re not talking about concrete changes we want to make if any.

EAO: Do we agree that regex describes what is bad - if you match the regex, you _might_ be good.

MIH: No.

APP: Let’s pick date - if you have a date in a Java long, how do we know it matches.

EAO: Regex is a side-question there - They’re only applied to literal string,.

APP: I was saying “here are the literal string values that match type ‘foo’”

EAO: If it matches, it’s probably OK (but we don’t guarantee). If it doesn’t match it’s definitely bad.

APP: I can support that.

MIH: I’d almost agree with EAO if he relaxes the second part (i.e. it’s _probably_ bad).

EAO: I’d argue in that case that we shouldn’t be using strict regex. Users are consuming data as input - that might be validation tools which don’t have access to the full implementation and will look at a rule. This rule will give the value “that’s definitely bad”

APP: I think we’re verging on agreement. We should make PRs to implement this. I think that will allow us to have a concrete conversation about what we’re doing,.

MIH: How do you feel about having a flag on the regex saying strict or not.? (i.e. is it just a warning?). I have examples where we block translators but it’s a valid use that gets blocked.

EAO: I would say lets make the regex really lax and rely on the fact that we are building a registry that implementations can build upon. They can go above and beyond.

APP: Some of the examples are here - https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/blob/main/spec/registry.md#example. EAO, you’re correct. What we’re looping around on is input validation.

EAO: I think the action point here is to describe to humans how these functions work, rather than to machines that APIs are. This is an action that we should be strongly focusing on now so we can wrap up in 2 weeks.

APP: I propose putting these to rest. If we need to change the spec, we can propose it. The convo we desperately nede to have is what functions with what inputs? How do they work?

EAO: I’ve heard 2 extremes - all the things that would be helpful, vs. just :string and : number and :datetime. If we are continuing with what we’ve been doing, the onus is on the people that want to change the state of affairs to provide a PR.

APP: What actions happen out of this?

EAO: Somebody review my JavaScript spec text.
http://tc39.es/proposal-intl-messageformat/

APP: Also discuss options offline.

EAO: Anyone picking up the action of describing :string and :datetime ?
The interface is described but we don’t describe what happens with inputs. It shouldn’t be controversial but we should still describe it somewhere.

STA: Why describe how formatters work?

APP: We’re saying `:datetime date-style=short` should give a short date. The selection behaviour needs to be described clearly. We should also describe the parameters but not the implementation.

EAO: Having such a description would enable us to better write test cases.

## Topic: AOB?


