# 4 March 2024 | MessageFormat Working Group Teleconference

### Attendees
- Addison Phillips - Unicode (APP) - chair
- Eemeli Aro - Mozilla (EAO)
- Elango Cheran - Google (ECH)
- Mihai Niță - Google (MIH)
- Richard Gibson - OpenJSF (RGN)
- Simon Clark - Oracle (SCA)
- Staś Małolepszy - Google (STA)
- Tim Chevalier - Igalia (TIM)
- Ujjwal Sharma - Igalia (USA)

Scribe: RGN

## Topic: Action Item Review

https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3AAction-Item

## Topic: Getting to Done

APP: README updated to highlight issues seeking feedback.

## Topic: PR Review

APP: #696 is scheduled for LDML45.

APP: Does anyone want to review before merging?

APP: [after discussion on that point] OK, sounds good.

## Topic: Issue review

Let’s close all of the issues
https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3ALDML45


Issue
Description
Recommendation
#701
[FEEDBACK] add :number offset option


EAO: It would be great for the ICU TC to weigh in.

EAO: Having functionality like “offset” be defined in spec rather than ICU details would really push this forward.

## Topic: Things to do in Tech Preview

APP: It’s a good time to start thinking about what we want to accomplish here—function registry format, precise data model, testing, details of “resolved value”, etc.

APP: I can think of cases where options are transitive vs. not, and where a function modifies an operand value vs. not. The function registry should describe such details.

TIM: I’ve started a doc, but it’s currently on pause.

## Topic: AOB?

EAO: I’ve been working on Python code for converting .properties and Fluent files to MF2, which has necessitated representing the data model as Python classes. It seems that “.input” vs. “.local” don’t really have a meaningful representational distinction, that literal values might just be strings, etc.

EAO: Is anyone else interested in a pythonic representation of MF2 resources?

MIH: I would, but after ICU. I have implemented the data model exactly as described in Java, because I want feedback to be relevant to the spec rather than to my implementation.

MIH: We’re not preserving the sigil, but…

EAO: It’s in the `source`.

EAO: One thing we do need to resolve in the preview is representation of reserved and private use syntax. We relaxed stability to get the details right, but still need to actually sort this out. RGN mentioned e.g. possible future statements like “.strict” with no following expressions.

MIH: I did reopen #635 (red flags with the current grammar for reserved-statement), which we closed inappropriately after the last meeting.

APP: OK, I added the Preview-Feedback label.

EAO: I don’t think we have an issue for “.strict”, but RGN raised points in the general discussion. RGN, would you like to make an issue?

RGN: I thought we already had one, but if not then I can find a relevant comment and promote it.

APP: Anything else?

APP: We do need to figure out how to work after the tech preview. We previously discussed a branch dedicated to LDML45 while main continues to advance, but I don’t plan to do that until we pull the trigger on 45.

EAO: Do we have a list of topics that definitely need to be visited, possibly prioritized (e.g., annotations)? Or is that to be collected later?

APP: It needs to happen soon, and I think annotations is included along with function registry maintenance, BIDI, reserved statements, etc. We should definitely pull something together and triage whatever should be out of scope for LDML46.

APP: Given the push for tech preview, let’s cancel next week and then recalibrate meeting frequency after that. Possibly to biweekly.

EAO: I’d like to delay that conversation until we have an enumeration of topics and an understanding of their target dates.

EAO: Who will be reviewing the test suite I have checked in?

MIH: I will be using it and reviewing as I do.

EAO: Once we have multiple implementations, we’ll need to verify that errors are analogous (type/circumstances/messages/etc.). For example, if you try to start a complex message with space, you will get an error relating to source text at a later position.

SCA: Should the spec differentiate the kinds of errors?

EAO: We do that by classifying types.

SCA: Are those non-localizable?

APP: The names are meaningful and ought not be localized, but we don’t define details around error e.g. reporting mechanisms. We could be more formal, though.
